********************************************
Readme / documentation for the execo package
********************************************

Execo offers a Python API for local or remote, standalone or parallel,
processes execution. It is especially well suited for scripting
workflows of parallel/distributed operations on local or remote hosts:
conducting experiments, performing automated tests, etc. The core
python module is ``execo``. The ``execo_g5k`` module provides a set of
tools and extensions to execo, to be used in Grid5000. The
``g5k_api_tools`` module offers simple functions for dealing with the
Grid5000 rest API. The ``g5k-deploy`` shell command builds upon these
modules to deploy environments on grid5000 with a more user friendly
interface than kadeploy.

license
=======

Execo is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

Execo is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with Execo.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>

installation instructions
=========================

links
-----

execo project page on INRIA Forge: http://gforge.inria.fr/projects/execo/

execo home page on INRIA Forge: http://execo.gforge.inria.fr

execo package download: http://execo.gforge.inria.fr/downloads or https://gforge.inria.fr/frs/?group_id=2901

execo code repository: git://scm.gforge.inria.fr/execo/execo.git

execo documentation:
http://execo.gforge.inria.fr/doc/
http://execo.gforge.inria.fr/epydoc/

prerequisites
-------------

execo installation requires python (>= 2.5) and make (for debian 5.x,
packages python, make)

to use g5k_api_tools, python-simplejson
(http://pypi.python.org/pypi/simplejson/) and python-restclient
(http://pypi.python.org/pypi/py-restclient/1.3.3) are needed.

to build the documentation, sphinx and graphviz are needed (for debian
5.x, packages python-sphinx). Additionnaly, latex is needed for
building latex documentation, and epydoc for building epydoc
documentation.

to connect to remote hosts, ssh, scp or similar connexion tools are
needed. taktuk (http://taktuk.gforge.inria.fr/) is also needed if
taktuk style actions are used (probably version >= 3.6).

installation
------------

use the supplied makefile.

main targets are:

- build: to compile py files.

- install: to install. Pass option PREFIX=... for installing in a
  non-default location (default PREFIX is /usr/local).

- doc: to build doc. This target is an alias for sphinxdochtml. Other
  documentation targets are sphinxdoclatex and epydoc

- check: to run unittests and doctests

- clean: to clean everything

- dist: to create the execo package in dist/

- epydoc: another generated documentation (requires python-epydoc
  package)

usage
=====

See html documentation for module execo and execo_g5k at
http://execo.gforge.inria.fr/doc/
