**************
execo tutorial
**************

In this tutorial, the code can be executed from python source files,
but it can also be run interactively in a python shell, such as
``ipython``, which is very convenient to inspect the execo objects.

Installation
============

Prerequisites: you need (debian package names, adapt for other
distributions): ``make``, ``python`` (>= 2.6), ``python-httplib2`` and
optionnaly ``python-keyring``. You also need ``ssh`` and optionnaly
``taktuk``.

To install execo: In this tutorial it is shown how to install execo in
subdirectory ``.local/`` of your home, allowing installation on
computers where you are not root or when you don't want to mix
manually installed packages with packages managed by your distribution
package manager::

 $ git clone git://scm.gforge.inria.fr/execo/execo.git
 $ cd execo
 $ make install PREFIX=$HOME/.local

To add this directory to python search path (i assume bash shell here,
adapt for other shells)::

 $ PYTHONHOMEPATH="$HOME/.local/"$(python -c "import sys,os; print os.sep.join(['lib', 'python' + sys.version[:3], 'site-packages'])")
 $ export PYTHONPATH="$PYTHONHOMEPATH${PYTHONPATH:+:${PYTHONPATH}}"

You can put these two lines in your ``~/.profile`` to have your
environment setup automatically in all shells.

execo
=====

Core module. Handles launching of several operating system level
processes in parallel and controlling them *asynchronously*.  Handles
remote executions and file copies with ssh/scp and taktuk.

- Standalone processes: `execo.process.Process`, `execo.process.SshProcess`

- Parallel processes: `execo.action.Action`

Processes
---------

- `execo.process.Process`: abstraction of an operating system
  process. Fine grain asynchronous lifecycle handling:

  - start, wait, kill

  - stdout, stderr, error, pid, exit code

  - start date, end date

  - timeout handling

  - callbacks

  - shell; pty

- `execo.process.SshProcess`: Same thing but through ssh. Additional
  parameter: Host, ConnexionParams

  - Host: abstraction of a remote host: address, user, keyfile, port

  - ConnexionParams: connexion parameters, ssh options, ssh path,
    keyfile, port, user, etc.

Process examples
................

Local process
'''''''''''''

List all files in the root directory::

 from execo import *
 process = Process("ls /")
 process.run()
 print "process:\n%s" + str(process)
 print "process stdout:\n" + process.stdout()
 print "process stderr:\n" + process.stderr()

The ``ls`` process was directly spawned, not using a subshell. Use
option ``shell = True`` if a full shell environment is needed (e.g. to
expand environment variables or to use pipes). To find all files
in /tmp belonging to me::

 process = Process("find /tmp -user $USERNAME", shell = True).run()

Here a warning log was probably displayed, because if you are not
root, there are probably some directories in ``/tmp`` that ``find``
could not visit (lack of permissions), ``find`` does not return 0 in
this case. The default behavior of execo is to issue warning logs when
processes are in error, do not return 0, or timeout. If needed we can
instruct execo to ignore the exit code with option ``ignore_exit_code
= True``.

Remote process over ssh
'''''''''''''''''''''''

On one host *host1* Start an `execo.process.SshProcess` *process_A*
running an iperf server, then wait 5 seconds, then on another host
*host2* start an `execo.process.SshProcess` *process_B* running an
iperf client, then wait wait for *process_B* termination, then kill
*process_A*::

 from execo import *
 process_A = SshProcess("./iperf -s", "host1", ignore_exit_code = True)
 process_B = SshProcess("./iperf -c host1", "host2")
 process_A.start()
 sleep(1)
 process_B.start()
 process_B.wait()
 process_A.kill()

We ignore the exit code of *process_A* because it is killed at the
end, thus it always has a non-zero exit code

This example shows the asynchronous control of processes: while a
process is running (the iperf server), the code can do something else
(run the iperf client), and later get back control of the first
process (waiting for it, or as in this example killing it).

Actions
-------

- `execo.action.Action`: abstraction of a set of parallel
  Process. Asynchronous lifecycle handling:

  - start, kill, wait

  - access to individual Process

  - callbacks

  - timeout

  - errors

- `execo.action.Local`: A set of parallel local Process

- `execo.action.Remote`: A set of parallel remote SshProcess

- `execo.action.TaktukRemote`: Same as Remote but using taktuk instead
  of plain ssh

- `execo.action.Put`, `execo.action.Get`: send files or get files in
  parallel to/from remote hosts

- `execo.action.TaktukPut`, `execo.action.TaktukGet`: same using
  taktuk

- `execo.report.Report`: aggregates the results of several Action and
  pretty-prints summary reports

Remote example
..............

Run an iperf client and server simultaneously on two hosts, to
generate traffic in both directions::

 from execo import *
 hosts = [ "host1", "host2" ]
 targets = list(reversed(hosts))
 servers = Remote("./iperf -s", hosts, ignore_exit_code = True)
 clients = Remote("./iperf -c {{targets}}", hosts)
 servers.start()
 sleep(1)
 clients.run()
 servers.kill().wait()
 print Report([ servers, clients ]).to_string()

The iperf client command line shows the usage of *substitutions*: In
the command line given for Remote and in pathes given to Get, Put,
patterns are automatically substituted:

- all occurences of the literal string ``{{{host}}}`` are substituted by
  the address of the Host to which execo connects to.

- all occurences of ``{{<expression>}}`` are substituted in the
  following way: ``<expression>`` must be a python expression, which
  will be evaluated in the context (globals and locals) where the
  expression is declared, and which must return a
  sequence. ``{{<expression>}}`` will be replaced by
  ``<expression>[index % len(<expression>)]``. In short, it is a
  mapping between the sequence of command lines run on the hosts and
  the sequence ``<expression>``. See :ref:`execo-substitutions`.

execo_g5k
=========

A layer built on top of execo. It's purpose is to provide a convenient
API to use Grid5000 services:

- oar

  - oarsub, oardel

  - get current oar jobs

  - wait oar job start, get oar job nodes

- oargrid

  - oargridsub, oargriddel

  - get current oargrid jobs

  - wait oargrid job start, get oargrid job nodes

- kadeploy3

  - kadeploy: basic deployment

  - deploy: clever kadeploy: automatically avoids to deploy already
    deployed nodes, handles retries on top of kadeploy, callbacks to
    allow dynamically deciding when we have enough nodes (even for
    complex topologies)

To use execo on grid5000, you need to install it inside grid5000, for
example on a frontend. execo dependencies are installed on grid5000
frontends.

oarsub example
--------------

Run iperf servers on a group of 4 hosts on one cluster, and iperf
clients on a group of 4 hosts on another cluster. Each client targets
a different server. We get nodes with an OAR submissions, and delete
the OAR job afterwards::

 from execo import *
 from execo_g5k import *
 import itertools
 jobs = oarsub([
   ( OarSubmission(resources = "/cluster=2/nodes=4"), "nancy")
 ])
 nodes = []
 wait_oar_job_start(jobs[0][0], jobs[0][1])
 nodes = get_oar_job_nodes(jobs[0][0], jobs[0][1])
 # group nodes by cluster
 sources, targets = [ list(n) for c, n in itertools.groupby(
   sorted(nodes,
          lambda n1, n2: cmp(
            g5k_host_get_cluster(n1),
            g5k_host_get_cluster(n2))),
   g5k_host_get_cluster) ]
 servers = Remote("iperf -s",
                  targets,
                  connexion_params = default_oarsh_oarcp_params,
                  ignore_exit_code = True)
 clients = Remote("iperf -c {{[t.address for t in targets]}}",
                  sources,
                  connexion_params = default_oarsh_oarcp_params)
 servers.start()
 sleep(1)
 clients.run()
 servers.kill().wait()
 print Report([ servers, clients ]).to_string()
 oardel([(jobs[0][0], jobs[0][1])])

execo_g5k.api_utils
-------------------

This module is not automatically imported when importing execo_g5k (to
allow using execo_g5k without the httplib2 dependency), you have to
import it explicitely.

It provides various useful function which deal with the Grid5000 API.

For example, to work interactively on all grid5000 frontends at the
same time: Here we create a directory, copy a file inside it, then
delete the directory, on all frontends simultaneously::

 from execo import *
 from execo_g5k import *
 from execo_g5k.api_utils import *
 sites = get_g5k_sites()
 Remote("mkdir -p execo_tutorial/",
        sites,
        connexion_params = default_frontend_connexion_params).run()
 Put(sites,
     ["~/.profile"],
     "execo_tutorial/",
     connexion_params = default_frontend_connexion_params).run()
 Remote("rm -r execo_tutorial/",
        sites,
        connexion_params = default_frontend_connexion_params).run()

If ssh proxycommand and execo configuration are configured as
described in :ref:`tutorial-configuration`, this example can be run
from outside grid5000.

More advanced usages
====================

.. _tutorial-configuration:

Configuration of execo, execo_g5k
---------------------------------

Execo reads configuration file ``~/.execo.conf.py``. A sample
configuration file ``execo.conf.py.sample`` is created in execo source
package directory when execo is built. This file can be used as a
canvas to overide some particular configuration variables. See
detailed documentation in :ref:`execo-configuration`.

For example, if you use ssh with a proxycommand to connect directly to
grid5000 servers or nodes from outside, as described in
https://www.grid5000.fr/mediawiki/index.php/SSH#Using_SSH_with_ssh_proxycommand_setup_to_access_hosts_inside_Grid.275000
the following configuration will allow to connect to grid5000 with
execo from outside. Note that
``g5k_configuration['oar_job_key_file']`` is indeed the path to the
key *inside* grid5000, because it is used at reservation time and oar
must have access to it. ``default_oarsh_oarcp_params['keyfile']`` is
the path to the same key *outside* grid5000, because it is used to
connect to the nodes from outside::

 import re

 def host_rewrite_func(host):
     return re.sub("\.grid5000\.fr$", ".g5k", host)

 def frontend_rewrite_func(host):
     return host + ".g5k"

 g5k_configuration = {
     'oar_job_key_file': 'path/to/ssh/key/inside/grid5000',
     'default_frontend' : 'lyon',
     'api_username' : 'g5k_username'
     }

 default_connexion_params = {'host_rewrite_func': host_rewrite_func}
 default_frontend_connexion_params = {'host_rewrite_func': frontend_rewrite_func}

 default_oarsh_oarcp_params = {
     'user':        "oar",
     'keyfile':     "path/to/ssh/key/outside/grid5000",
     'port':        6667,
     'ssh':         'ssh',
     'scp':         'scp',
     'taktuk_connector': 'ssh',
     'host_rewrite_func': host_rewrite_func,
     }

Processes and actions factories
-------------------------------

Processes and actions can be instanciated directly, but it can be more
convenient to use the factory methods `execo.process.get_process`
`execo.action.get_remote`, `execo.action.get_fileput`,
`execo.action.get_fileget` to instanciate the right objects:

- `execo.process.get_process` instanciates a Process or SshProcess
  depending on the presence of argument host different from None.

- `execo.action.get_remote`, `execo.action.get_fileput`,
  `execo.action.get_fileget` instanciate ssh or taktuk based
  instances, depending on configuration variables "remote_tool",
  "fileput_tool", "fileget_tool"
